#ValidationPipeline
This is a validation pipeline for checking the accuracy of an assembler. 

The inputs to the pipeline are fasta files. A fasta file for the reference genome and one or more fasta files for contigs/reads.

This pipeline does the following things - 

1. Uses simple exact matching to get the alignment percent of a read/contig with the reference
2. Uses BWA to find the alignment of read/contig with the reference
3. Compares the percentage of kmers common between the reads/contig and reference

#PREREQUISITES -

1. Python 2.7


2. BWA - version used bwa-0.7.15-r1140, Should be present in the PATH

		# Install using homebrew
		brew install bwa

3. DSK - version used 2.1.0, Should be present in the PATH

		# Install using homebrew
		brew install dsk

4. SAMTOOLS - version used 1.3.1, Should be present in the PATH

		# Install using homebrew
		brew install samtools

#INSTALLATION

To use the program

SSH 
	
	git clone git@github.com:mayankpahadia1993/validationpipeline.git


HTTPS
	
	git clone https://github.com/mayankpahadia1993/validationpipeline.git

#TESTING
			
	cd validationpipeline/test/;
	bash test.sh;

Output - "EVERYTHING IS WELL" at the end or an Error if something didn't go as planned.


#USAGE 


	#In the validationpipeline folder
	bash run.sh -r referenceFile.fa -s suffixTree.p -i InputFile.fa -a AlignmentResults

#OPTIONS

-r -s -i|-f are compulsory options. -i can be multiple


`-r | --reference filename` for passing the reference file


`-s | --suffixtree filename` filename will store the suffixtree, or contains the suffixtree if it has already been created.


`-i | --input filename` filename contains the input file to be checked


`-a | --alignment filename` filename is the file in which alignment results will be shown. Default Value is alignmentResults.txt


`-f | --file filename` filename is a file which contains the input filenames. One filename per line.


`-suffixskip BinaryInteger` to skip the Suffix Tree Creation. The default value is 0 and will create the Suffix Tree. Using 1 will skip the suffix tree creation step.


`-bwaskip BinaryInteger` to skip the bwa step. The default value is 0 and it will do the bwa step. Using 1 will skip the bwa step.


`-kmer-size Integer` The integer given here would be chosen as the kmer size. Default is 30. 


`-abundance-min Integer` The integer given here would be chosen as the abundance min. Default is 3. Abundance min represents the minimum count of a kmer which will be stored. 


#INPUT

The mandatory input to the program is the reference file, suffix tree file and the files containing reads and contigs.

The reference file and read files must be in the fasta format. The reads here usually mean contigs or unitigs which we get after running an assembler.

Suffix Tree file is the filename in which the suffix tree gets stored, if it has been created in the pipeline. The creation works if the `-suffixskip 0` option is set, which is also the default option. 

If `-suffixskip 1` is used, the suffix tree creation step will be skipped and the suffix tree in the filename mentioned with the option `-s|--suffixtree filename` will be used. 

#OUTPUT

These are the output files that are generated by the pipeline - 

1. AlignmentResults
2. *.commonKmers12
3. *.commonKmers12
4. SuffixTreeOutput file
5. BAM File
6. *.alignments


###AlignmentResults 
The output is in the file specified with the option "-a|--alignment". Each row represents a file and its results. Each row will contain a maximum of 5 columns, all separated by tabs.

The 5 columns are - 

	a. Filename - This column has the name of the input files(reads/contigs).


	b. Align Percentage - This column has the align percentage calculated using simple exact matching. Align percentage is the percentage of input contigs/reads present exactly in the reference.


	c. BWA Percentage - This column has the align percentage calculated using BWA MEM. The percentage here represents the mapped percentage in the bwa output.


	d. Percentage of Kmers from Reference File in Input File - This column has the percentage of kmers common from the reference file in the input file.


	e. Percentage of Kmers from Input File in Reference File - This column has the percentage of kmers common from the input file in the reference file.


Example - 


FILENAME	Align Percentage	BWA Percentage	Percentage of Kmers from Reference File in Input File	Percentage of Kmers from Input File in Reference File

test/reads.fa	22.136	100.00%	100.0%	1.27982540829%

###*.commonKmers12 
These files are generated for all the input files. In this file, there is one row for one kmer from the input file. Every row contains two columns. The first column is the kmer and the second column is a binary number. '1' represents the kmer is present in the reference file and '0' represents it is not. It is tab separated. 


###*.commonKmers21
These files are generated for all the input files. In this file, there is one row for one kmer from the reference file. Every row contains two columns. The first column is the kmer and the second column is a binary number. '1' represents the kmer is present in the input file and '0' represents it is not. It is tab separated.

###suffixTreeOutput File
This file stores the suffix tree of the reference which was created. This file is generated only if suffixskip option is at 0 i.e. `-suffixskip 0` option is set.

###Bam File
This file is generated for all the inputs. It stores the alignments done by bwa. It is generated only if bwa step is not skipped.

###.alignments
This file is generated for all the inputs. In the file, there is one row for one contig/read. Each row has two columns. First column is the contig/read id. The second column is a binary number. '1' represents that the contig is present exactly in the reference. '0' represents that it is not. It is tab separated.

#Acknowledgement

dsk - https://github.com/GATB/dsk

Suffix tree - https://github.com/kvh/Python-Suffix-Tree

bwa - https://github.com/lh3/bwa

samtools - https://github.com/samtools
